---
title: Guide to Financial Management
date: "2020-05-01T22:12:03.284Z"
description: "a brief and practical overview of finance for new investors to understand what they are in for. This would prep the new investor on potential pitfalls and how to properly evaluate the different options out there. It will also touch briefly on other financial instruments out there in the market."
---

## Foreword

It has been said that investment is the way to get rich so that one can be financially independent by 50 years old and retire then.
I do not subscribe to this thinking. Yet, the importance of investment cannot be emphasised more even if it is not a sure ticket to financial freedom.
I will share my thoughts on managing personal finance, introducing both the wonders and excitement of investment as well as the less-than-rosy aspects of it which financial planners that you meet will often not dwell on.
Stocks, bonds, mutual funds and derivatives. A wide range of financial instruments are available out there, many promising outrageous returns while others promising security. This guide will only focus on the equity market, or more commonly known as the stock market. It is written mainly for young adults first venturing into investment. It is not meant for one to turn rich overnight and to partake in extremely high risk investment. There are two main sections:
1. Finance 101 – a brief and practical overview of finance for new investors to understand what they are in for. This would prep the new investor on potential pitfalls and how to properly evaluate the different options out there. It will also touch briefly on other financial instruments out there in the market.
2. Practical Guide in the Stock Market – A quick guide on how to set up your trading account and how to make sense of it.
## Finance 101
If you are in your 20s and beyond, you would probably have attended some lessons, workshops or seminars on basic finance. This section will bring out the key concepts that will help you appreciate the financial world better and evaluate the different financial instruments out there. While certain content may not be the most up-to-date, the concepts should be broadly accurate. The purpose is to let you understand what you are in for when you start to invest, so that you equipped to make an informed decision.
Understanding the Market and the Financial Instruments
If you have heard of terms like CAPM and Security Market Line, then you are probably slightly ahead of others. If you have not, fret not. The idea is that the return of a financial product is generally correlated to the risk. A higher risk product will give you a higher return. I will highlight a few more common products that you might have heard of and their respective annualised return:
Saving Deposit – 0.05% Fixed Deposit – 1% Government Saving Bonds – 1.6% Short Term Endowment Saving Plans – 2-3% Longer Term Endowment Saving Plans – 3-4% Stock and Equity - >3% depending on what you purchase Investment Link Policy – >8% Hedge Fund – >10%
Why is it that there are different returns for different products? To put it in plain terms - because each of these product has different risk level. In attracting people to buy higher risk products, the issuer of the product would need to declare a higher return so that people are willing buy it, taking into consideration that buyers may lose some if not all of the value at the end of the day. Assuming that everyone is fully informed of the risk a product possesses (which in my opinion is a poor assumption that I will explain later), the market price of each product will be adjusted such that there is no one product that is absolutely better than another. Then, assuming this principle is true, the list of products mentioned earlier can be plotted out into something like this:
Now, if you are a fund manager, a full time trader or simply someone who is super confident of your ability to pick good stocks, you will be spending hours every day trying to find a product that lies above or below this line. Anything above this line is considered to have returns above the “market” – you will buy it. Anything below this line is below the “market” and you will quickly sell it before others find out!
Actually there is another dimension to this line which is liquidity. Liquidity is the ease of converting this product back into cash after you buy it. Not all products are liquid. For example, you would need to wait for about a year before you can take out the money for fixed deposit plans. Saving plans may take up to 20 years before you could pull out, otherwise you pay certain penalties that will make your returns trashy. The less liquid the product is, the more it should warrant a higher return in order for it to be on par with other similar products in the market. This is also why the same bank can offer you a 1% rate when you forgo liquidity and park the money in a fixed deposit account for a year, as compared to 0.05% for saving deposits, which you can withdraw cash at your disposal.
Understanding the True Risk
They say that your risk appetite will determine the type of products that you will be buying, and accept the type of return that you will be getting. Theoretically, this principle is undeniable. But in reality, a sound concept in finance is necessary for one to appreciate the true risk and return of investment. This is the part that one must be cautious especially when you are inherently a risk averse investor (like myself) but because of misinformation, you unwittingly went after products that are actually much riskier than you have thought.
To me, anything above the short term saving plans is not considered as low risk anymore. I classify stocks, regardless of the nature of it as a medium risk product. Many people have the misconception that as long as one goes for blue chip stocks, they will never lose in the long run with a dividend return that is 3-4% annually which beats any saving plans or fixed deposit out there. So, why not! Now, if we just look into recent history, we see examples of blue chip stocks that have disappointed many investors. SMRT was delisted in 2016 at a price of $1.68. If you had bought it during its prime days, you would be bleeding. Hyflux is another recent case where investors are going to lose everything, not even claiming back partially as of the case of SMRT. You just need one or two of these in your portfolio and your overall returns over the years will be as good as nullified.
Of course, many will chime that these are not the real blue chip stocks! Unfortunately, these analysis were made RETROSPECTIVELY, which is a common case when one diligently reads the daily news reports. For your information, Hyflux was the darling of Singapore many years back (if you recall, they were one of the marching contingents during NDP). And with its expansion into China and the ever pressing need for clean reclaimed water all around the world, one would have thought this was a strong company set to grow. Many even used their retirement funds to purchase Hyflux’s perpetuity.
Fast forward to today, you may want to look at the stock market and write down on a piece of paper which you think are the “unfallable” blue chips; revisit their performance 10 years later. Today, the three local banks seem to be solid blue chip stocks. Many say that if it comes to the day that DBS falls, Singapore would have fallen anyway. However, how sure are we that banks will remain strong in 10 years from now, with new technologies and lifestyle such as digital banking, fintech and cryptocurrency? If you ask me, it is highly likely they will still be relevant – however, you can never be sure and that perhaps one of them may not sustain.
Understanding the True Return
Typically, lower risk investments will not go horribly wrong. However, for one to fully appreciate how much he or she is truly making, there is a need to have some financial concepts in place first.
Proper Accounting
Let’s face it. Investment is very fun, especially investing in the stock market where you can observe prices fluctuating on a day to day basis. It can be addictive, just like gambling – in fact with online platforms, playing the stock market is easier than queueing up for TOTO! And just like gambling, most people tend to overstate their gains and under-estimate their loses. For small scale retail investors like ourselves, it is important to have proper accounting, taking into consideration all the various costs and gains involved in trading such as broker fees, dividends etc (and for some shares, exchange rate and tax). Once that is done properly, many people will be in a for a rude shock on how much they are really earning – and that’s not all (read on).
Comparing with an Alternative Mode of Investment
Money can be used in many ways – spending it, putting it under your pillow, putting it in banks, investing it in a whole range of investment products. When making an investment, it is important to pit it against an alternative usage that is appropriate, such as fixed deposit. When you meet a financial advisor who is there to sell you a product, he or she will often compare their product to the meagre 0.05% interest rate in your saving accounts. This is a complete misinformation. There is a whole range of financial products out there that serve as better benchmark, depending on your lifestyle. For myself, I benchmark my investment against the OCBC 360 Savings Account (see later) which could give about 2% of risk-free return.
Computing the Rate of Return
We will not go into the mathematics behind financial products. But when it comes to investment, there are 3 parameters that we have to take into account – Risk, Return and Time Horizon. There is a common misconception that many stock market players have which distorted the true rate of returns of their portfolio. Let’s take a look at a simple example:
Outcome A: Bought a stock last year at $1,000. It gives a dividend of $50 per annum. This year, the price of the stock is $900.
Outcome B: Bought a stock last year at $1,000. It gives a dividend of $10 per annum. This year, the price of the stock is $950.
Outcome C: I hid a $1,000 note under my pillow last year and (for some reason) only found it this year.
All three scenarios began with $1,000 last year. For A, the investment gives a dividend yield of 5% while for B, the investment gives a dividend yield of only 1%. Some may think that well, as long as I do not sell away stock A, technically I didn’t lose any money. Hence, stock A gives a better return among these 3 investment decisions.
This is not totally wrong as in the long term, assuming stock A will maintain its dividend pay off, it will recover its lost. Besides, stock A may bounce back to $1,000 the following year. But to say that by not selling the stock there is no material lose in your investment is a fallacy. How do we reconcile that?
If we look at the current portfolio, Outcome A will be $50 + $900 = $950. Outcome B will be $10 + $950 = $960. Hence at least within this one year time horizon, Outcome B has a better return. In fact, in the case of Outcome C where no investment was made, the final “portfolio” sees $1,000! To further make clear on this point - Let’s say I want to relook into the portfolio this year. Having found my $1,000 note, I decided to buy stock A, spending a mere $900 on it. Then I keep $50 as savings and spend $50 to buy a meal.
Compared with Outcome A, I have:
1) One unit of stock A, same as option A
2) $50 as saving, same as option A
3) An extra $50 meal
4) In theory, my dividend yield of stock A in future is 5.5% - higher than Outcome A.
Hence, at least within this one year time horizon, the investment of A has been negative. In the longer term, only time can tell. This example also underscores the importance of having a clear time horizon in your investment, and also take into consideration any urgency to cash out the stock that you intend to buy.
Conclusion for Finance 101
Hopefully, you have a better appreciation of risk and return, and some ideas on how they are applied to the stock market. The first section only deals with the concept, with a few real-life illustrations. The purpose is to keep you more informed on the true risk and return associated when investing in the stock market so that you can make a correct decision.
In my opinion, stock market is generally considered quite risky, which is largely dependent on the stocks that you pick. If you are new to the stock market, and have little financial background, I do encourage you to take a conservative approach first, and not get attracted by the potential gains that many people are preaching. If you have digested what has been written so far, it should shed some light on why many people have claimed to gain tremendously from the stock market and also why it may not be true if they have done a proper financial evaluation.
Just to further reinforce the riskiness in the stock market – even a typical blue chip share can easily fluctuate about 3% from the highest point to the lowest point on a day to day basis. From what you have read earlier, can you appreciate what this entails? It means that within a day, you can easily gain (or lose) what it takes one or two years compared to investing in Government bonds. I hope this does not tempt you to jump into the stock market immediately or deter you from taking the risk. It simply means that we need a very measured methodology to handle such volatility in the market. This will be discussed in the next section.
Additional Notes:
Everyone has a different level of risk appetite. Studies have shown that most are actually risk averse, assuming that they are well-informed of the risk that they are partaking in. Most risks that were taken are uncalculated risk due to misinformation.
In a very typical climate of steady stock price, achieving a return of above 3% is actually pretty remarkable in itself. Very few investments out there can consistently achieve such returns for many years at a low risk. All it takes is one or two black sheep to pull down your entire portfolio when one embarks on risky investments. Of course during a down turn that is recovering, it is certainly possible
to achieve an above 10% annualised return even on blue chip stocks. But shares go up and down, and recessions and booms come in and out.
As mentioned, I pit my investment performance against the OCBC 360 Account, which gives a near risk-free interest rate of up to 2.2% annualised return as long as I fulfil certain criteria, on the first $70,000 deposit. UOB One and DBS Multiplier boast similar schemes. If you are still new to investment and have not set your mind into what to buy, do yourself a favour and sign up with one of these accounts first. The return is really decent for a risk-free investment. Now, if we go back to the market plot, this is where OCBC 360 will stand:
In fact, if you are actively seeking for an “alpha” investment, one that is above the security market line, you have just found one! No doubt it doesn’t give you great returns, but it is completely risk-free and completely liquid. In fact, if your income is average and you just started work, I will strongly advise you to fill up your account up till $70,000 first (or in the case of UOB One, $75,000) to enjoy this under-valued investment.
To further reinforce the idea of risk and uncertainty, even the so-called risk-free investment can have some sort of uncertainty. With the onset of COVID-19, all the banks have dropped their interest rate, and the OCBC 360 Account no longer enjoys such interest rate (although still acceptable). Hopefully, things will revert to normalcy and so will the interest rate. In any case, under such circumstances it is timely to move some of these highly liquid cash out from the saving deposits into the equity market to catch the recovery.
Section 2: A Quick Guide to Stock Market
Having your own trading account and investing in the stock market is extremely exciting and also dangerously addictive. If you have understood the concepts shared earlier and put in the effort to do proper accounting of your gains and losses, it will prove to be a very enriching experience.
First and foremost, this guide differentiates between investment and speculation. Investment here refers holding a product for a longer term to gain a steady return. Speculation on the other hand expects very quick and tremendous gains within a short period of time, usually involving considerable risk. Therefore, this guide will share on the following using concrete examples and illustrations:
(a) How to set up a trading account to start buying stocks
(b) A basic guide on the standard features of the trading account
(c) How the market works and some common observations
(d) Guidelines for beginners and young working adults on buying stocks and ETF
(e) Additional tips
It will not be touching on the following:
(a) High risk investment strategies including leveraging and short selling
(b) Other financial products such as bonds, perpetuities and derivatives
(c) How to be an expert at picking stocks and becoming rich overnight
Setting Up an Account
In order to trade on the market, you must first set up a Central Depository Account (CDP) with SGX. This is basically where all your stocks that you bought are stored at. Ironically, the CDP account is usually not well remembered after you have set up as you don’t need to visit it regularly. The setting up is usually fast and simple, taking just a few days of processing.
However, the CDP account does not allow you to trade. You need to set up a brokerage account, which is usually a bank. Basically, you assign a broker to help you buy and sell stocks in the market and deposit it in the CDP. There are many brokers out there which are largely the same, differing only slightly by the broker fee, which usually includes a minimum charge per transaction. A transaction takes place whenever you buy or sell something. A minimum fee can be a rather hefty sum if your transaction is small, so do take that into account for your trades.
There are many brokers out there in the market and the pros and cons can be found easily on other websites. Just to highlight that some brokers hold your stocks in custodian, which means that you technically don’t own the stocks in your CDP. The risk is that if the broker goes bankrupt, you may lose your shares. Consequently, brokers who are in custodian usually has lower broker fees.
I am currently using OCBC Securities, arguably not the best broker out there with a minimum fee of $25 per transaction regardless of the volume. However, unless you are trading extensively every day, it doesn’t differ by much – you do not have to spend weeks trying to optimise and get the best broker. You will have more difficult decisions to make when the trading starts. I chose OCBC Securities because I have an existing bank account with OCBC, and I quite like the service of the bank. Of course after I signed up I realised that OCBC Securities and OCBC bank are two separate entities and they do not even communicate with each other. Regardless, I am still happy with what I have.
Setting up a brokerage account can be quite tedious and could take up to 4 weeks to be approved.
Making Sense of the Trading Interface
Regardless which brokerage account you chose eventually, the trading platform should be largely similar. If this is the first time you have logged into your account, you are probably overwhelmed by the amass of information and numbers that are constantly flickering. I will attempt to introduce some of the key features here.
1. Watchlist
I suggest you can start off by creating your watchlist. These are the stocks that interest you most and that you want to monitor regularly. I am conservative and risk averse in nature, hence the stocks that I look at are mainly blue chips that are inside the Straits Times Index (STI).
It is always a good idea to have the STI Index in your watchlist and most investors want to know overall, how is the market doing today. The STI is not a stock on its own. An index means that it is a basket of weighted prices of all the stocks that defined the index. For STI, the 3 local banks made up a significant weight of the index (more than 30%), followed by companies like Singtel and some bigger scale corporations in Singapore. The STI index therefore, gives an indication on how the Singapore market is moving as a whole. It is usually a good idea to have some of the overseas indexes in your watchlist too – for example the US Dow Jones and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index. There is usually rather strong correlation between the different indexes.
As I am also interested in REITs (to be elaborated later), I also have a watchlist of REITs.
Over time, you can add in more and more stocks that you are interested in. You can also add in different watchlists to monitor different baskets of stocks. Putting them together, you can see that on this particular day, all the price of REITs surged for some reasons. The same cannot be said of the other STI stocks as you see that overall, STI actually dipped slightly. Probably, certain news that were specific to REITs might have triggered this (e.g. Announcement of the lifting of Circuit Breaker and allowing retailers to start operating before end June).
On a side note, I would like to bring you back to the point I made in Section 1 Finance 101 on stock volatility. From the movement of the stock market on this particular day, you can see how many stocks fluctuate more than 3% within a day. If the REIT watchlist looks rosy to you, you may also want to look at SPH under my main watchlist, which suffered a 12% fall on the same day.
2. Charts
Charts can be pretty useful to look at the historical trend of a stock, and it certainly does make you feel more professional staring at it and trying to decipher some underlying trend. All trading platforms allow you to plot charts on one or even multiple plots. Do play around and change the time horizon of each plot as the default 1 year may not be very representative of the actual performance. The plots below shows the trend of OCBC share price over a 3-year period.
It shows that the stock was at a 3-year low of $7.80 during end March, presumably due to the onset of COVID-19 in Singapore. However, there was a sharp rebound shortly after the Government announced a generous stimulus package which greatly boosted the sentiments of the entire equity market. Thereafter, the price in general, had hovered between $8 to $9. Compared to a 2-year steady price of around $11, isn’t it a great time to start investing?
3. Trades
For OCBC Securities, you can buy or queue for a stock by right clicking from the watchlist or from the market info itself. You need to indicate the buy price and the number of lots you wish to buy.
Trade limit - Do note that there is a buy and sell limit which is the maximum amount that you can spend to buy or sell, which is determined somewhat by your credit worth and can be negotiated with your broker if necessary. Do further note that if you have a buy limit of $20,000, it means that you can only buy up to $20,000 and the limit will only be reset after your GIRO payment has been deducted from your bank account. This can take a few working days – which means if you got excited and pumped in $15,000 in a day, and the next day you want to buy $6,000 worth of stocks, you will breach the limit and will not be allowed to proceed. You can negotiate with your broker to increase your limit. If this is new to you, it probably suggests that you are not a frequent trader, I suggest you exercise discipline and not increase the limit in a moment of excitement. The limit exists for a purpose.
Number of lots – One lot is now 100 units of the stock, which is the minimum volume that you can buy. So DBS is currently at $19.47 and if you want to buy one lot, it will cost you $19.47 x 100 = $1,947. In the past, one minimum lot used to be 1,000. I mean as a young adult, how many of us could afford $19,470 at one go? Hence the enhancement is really good for retail investors like us.
Queueing – When you place a buy on a stock, you are technically queueing for it. If there is someone in the market that is willing to sell at the price you are willing to buy, then there will be a transaction. Otherwise the queue will go on. You can even queue after trading hours, something that is useful for working adults like us who don’t monitor the stock market throughout the day.
How the Market Works
At this stage, we need to go to the fundamentals of how the stock market works. Essentially, the stock market works like an auction market, where there must be a seller and a buyer who is willing to sell at an agreed price. There are 3 prices that we need to know:
Buying Price – this is the highest price that someone in the market is willing to buy a particular stock.
Selling Price – this is the lowest price that someone in the market is willing to sell a particular stock
Market Price – this is the last transacted price, whereby a buyer and a seller has both agreed on the price and a transaction took place.
We can take a look at Ascendas Reit for this example. The Market price of Ascendas is currently at $3.130. This is also the last transacted price. At that instance, the Buy price is $3.120 which means that the highest price someone is willing to pay is slightly below the market price. The selling price is $3.130, which is also the market price. No transaction is happening at this instance because there is no price that is mutually agreeable between the buyer and the seller.
Now, if one of the sellers got impatient and decided to lower his selling price to $3.120, then immediately there is a mutually agreeable price and the first buyer in the queue who bid $3.120 will get it. A transaction is completed and consequently, the market price is now adjusted to $3.120. The reverse could also have happened and this is essentially how prices go up and down. It is all demand and supply.
Buyer and Seller could be anyone, such as ourselves, who are trading in the market. Just to highlight that for Exchange Traded Fund (ETF), it does not follow exactly the same mechanism. Nonetheless the concept and method of trading is largely the same.
Guidelines and Tips for Beginners
Now that we have touched on the fundamentals, let’s get to more practical aspects. As mentioned, this guide is meant for people who are investing on a reasonably long term basis and with moderate risk appetite. It is also more tuned towards young working adults with decent salaries who wish to park their money somewhere to earn returns beyond typical deposits. It will not be applicable for those who want to make a living out of investment or hoping to be financially independent by 40 or 50 years old. It will however, be relevant for someone who wishes to make a considerable gain during a crisis like COVID-19.
How to Start?
It first begins with when you should enter the market. Experts say that you can start any time, especially if you subscribe to the school of long term dollar cost averaging. Indeed, it is very difficult to predict the movement of the market, contrary to popular belief. As before, analysts can explain market movement well, but usually done retrospectively.
Let’s say you started in the midst of COVID-19.
The lowest point was in end March, with STI falling to 2,200 points. Looking back at the graph, it does not require an expert to say that it would have been a great time to buy. However, if we look at the past 10 days preceding that lowest point, we can see that share price was dipping at a dramatic rate. Under such circumstances, would you have waited and observe if it would fall further? And within a few days, STI Index rebounded to above 2,500, which was essentially almost today’s price. If you were patiently waiting for the lowest point, would you have been willing to accept this new “low”?
The fact is that at any point in time, you would never know when the lowest point is. You need to have a reference point to start off, before you can make further decisions. Therefore, I do believe that you can start any time. And in a circumstances like this, when share prices are generally at 15-20% below the pre-crisis level, you could almost never go wrong.
Dollar Cost Averaging and Consistency
That’s it. Once you have made your first purchase, you have opened up a new horizon. Before we go on, I caution again to exercise discipline (assuming that this is your first buy of your life), especially if you are rather cash rich. And once again, I would like to emphasize that we are investing in the long term, at least long enough for you to keep the stocks if necessary until the crisis is over, which can take more than a year.
Before long, you are in the same dilemma once again. It is difficult to tell whether share is going up or down. If you look at the time horizon from April to May, you can see that it generally went up and down, but hovered around the same price. The same cannot be said of other stocks in terms of pattern, but certainly shares the same dilemma. If you follow the long-term dollar cost averaging methodology, then the trick is to continue to consistently buy, regardless whether the price is going up or down.
But this is extremely boring, isn’t it? It is as if there is no need to monitor stocks and miss the fun of all the daily or weekly fluctuations. I think this concept is great and should be adopted for long term
investors like us who are not genius at the financial market. However, since we are in an extraordinary period of time, there is no harm in making some adjustment to this boring methodology and ride on a potential market recovery. Hence, I suggest we can increase the frequency of buying a bit more than what you would be doing during a typical period. For example, if you plan to buy stocks once every 3 months, you can increase it to once every month and so on. In addition, there is certainly no harm in trying to gain a bit from the daily fluctuation instead of buying the stocks periodically like a robot. This is what I call the adjusted long-term dollar cost averaging methodology.
Number of counters and buying volume
Typically, having more counters give you a more diversified portfolio and hence reduces risk. It is also in our inherent nature to have more counters as it is fun to pick stocks and watch their performance over time. However, you will be in a dilemma when you have too many counters but insufficient lots during a time when the price starts to increase. You will be torn between cashing them out immediately to get quick wins, and hoping that they will further grow into a really high-yield stock (remember, we are into the long term and at the same time, we also can’t tell for sure whether the surge is sustainable). If you have many lots within the counter, this is when you can sell some. But with limited lots because of too many counters, the decision becomes more of a gamble.
At the same time, having too many counters makes it difficult to do long term dollar cost averaging, since you are supposed to keep buying more counters over time. But our cash is limited hence we can’t afford to “feed” so many counters. As a start, I recommend keeping below 10 counters and less than 5 during the first month.
The buy volume (number of lots) is another dilemma that investors will face. The minimum broker fee can cream off the return from the stock if the volume is too low; while it is expensive and risky to purchase at high volume. Imagine if you are using OCBC Securities and buying at $1,000 per transaction. When you buy and sell this batch, you will incur slightly more than $25 + $25 = $50 of fees. The fees itself thereafter amounts to 5% of the stock. This means that you only made a true profit if the stock manages to gain more than 5% in capital appreciation, or give that level of dividends.
How much you should buy really depends on your income and how much cash you have. If you are using SAXO or Standard Chartered that are custodian held, you can afford to make smaller purchase due to the lower minimum charge. For myself, I tend to make relatively bigger purchases, at least $3,000 which will already translate to a broker fee of more than 1%. However, this is strictly dependent on your financial capability and should not be mirrored completely. Larger volume also has the advantage of selling off partially when price rises, as shared earlier on.
Cash to Equity Ratio
How much of your cash should be invested in the stock market really depends on individual risk appetite and lifestyle, as well as how much cash is required for immediate needs. If you are getting married in 6 months’ time and you need all the cash you have for expenses, then it is really not advisable for you to invest in the market at this point of time. If you have plenty of spare cash and a steady flow of income, then you can consider investing more to ride on the crisis recovery.
In these extraordinary times, we can say that the prices are generally low now and one day, STI would bounce back to 3,000 points. I am willing to invest a larger proportion of money into the stock market than normal days but I will make sure that I have sufficient cash to do the dollar cost
averaging for all my counters at least for the coming months. In addition, I have also kept a significant amount (almost equal to what I have invested so far) of additional spare cash that is earning the ~2% interest rate in saving deposits which I am willing to mobilise and further invest into the stock market in the event that the recession is prolonged. This is the balance between gaining maximally from the recession and safeguarding against a worsening bearish market. You can easily adjust this ratio if you want to bet that there is no second wave and the economy will start to recover once the Circuit Breaker is over.
How to Choose a Stock?
Dividend - My preference is to go for stocks that at give dividends, ideally at least one that gives a 3% annualised return of dividends. Of course in the current climate, we cannot expect many stocks to be able to do that. Hence, we should take note of the historical trend. At this point, I would like to highlight a common fallacy when it comes to dividend yield. If you are to Google the dividends of a stock and search them out in dividend.sg or yahoo finance, you will notice that the dividend yield is always as of the current stock price. This can be somewhat misleading as stock price has plummeted during this period which will over-inflate the dividend yield, which were issued during a time of good economy. For all you know, you will not be receiving such level of dividends for the years to come. A good practice is to look at the historical dividends and see how consistent it has been. For instance, ST Engineering has a very consistent dividend payout regardless of its stock price and economic circumstances.
Prospect of the company – many people try to pick stocks based on this but reality may contradict with what is supposedly common sense. Nevertheless, we do want to appear knowledgeable and bet on winners of the stock market based on their prospects isn’t it? The reason why I go for dividends is because dividends are a sign of profit which is somewhat related to the prospect of the company. I also picked a couple of technological-related stocks such as Singtel and ST Engineering while generally shunning those in cut-throat market like SIA and waning industry like SPH. In general, unless you are an expert in a particular industry, this may not be the best yard stick.
REITs – REITs are real estate investment trust. They are a great form of investments as the prices are generally low and they give good dividend yields. There are several kinds of REITs: industry, commercial, retail, hospitality and healthcare. As long as the economy is doing well, we can expect a steady flow of dividend because REITs are mandated by law to distribute 90% of its taxable income to shareholders. Basically, you can be assured of the cashflow which is why REITs are often quoted as investment for those who are looking for passive income. Today, the price of REITs are low for obvious reasons, especially retail REITs. However, if you are holding on a long term basis, we can expect the dividends to go back to normalcy once the economy picks up in a years’ time and enjoy an extraordinary high yield.
Diversification – whether you are holding on to numerous counters or just a couple, diversification is always recommended. For myself, most of my investments are in the REITs, but I balanced them with some banks and technological stocks as well. When it comes to diversification, the STI ETF itself is a great choice. Exchange Traded Funds (ETF) is a fund that tracks the STI Index. The actual structure is complex and will not be explained here. Essentially, one can treat the STI ETF as simply buying STI itself as a common stock. As a result, it is very diversified, low-risk and naturally, has limited gains as compared to other stocks. If you are risk-averse, the STI ETF is highly recommended especially during this time when STI Index is 15% - 20% lower than pre-crisis. I see no harm in loading a large portion of your portfolio with the ETF, especially when it gives dividends as well.
Conclusion on the Stock Market Guide
There is absolutely no need for an investor to spend hours staring at the screen trying to decipher hidden patterns in the stock market in order to make a measured and well-informed investment. For working adults like us, most of us will not have the liberty to monitor the market closely during working hours. Nevertheless, it will be good practice to at least take a look once in a while and match the market movement against things that are really happening in life. This will make the whole experience more enriching. For instance, did the imposition of Circuit Breaker and the further tightening lead to a dip in the market? In reality, it did not really result in a dip even when Singapore’s COVID case surged, which is contrary to popular believe. The contrast was more drastic for the US market, where we see that the US stock market is almost recovering fully now as of end May, despite having more than 100,000 deaths in the US alone so far.
To conclude, I will summarise some of the key points made and also add in a few good practices:
(1) Don’t overthink! If you are investing long term, don’t wait and hope to find the “lowest point” as you will never find it. You can start any time (or if it makes you feel better, find a time when the entire STI goes down) and do dollar cost averaging over time. You need a starting point to serve as a reference anyway, otherwise you will simply forget the values that you saw earlier on.
(2) Before you make a purchase, look at when is the stocks give out dividends. The Ex-Dividend Date is the date that you will no longer get dividend for the coming round even when you own the stock. Typically, prices of the stock will dip, somewhat proportional to the dividend payout. If you are investing long term, the recommendation is to buy after the Ex-Dividend Date, after the price has fallen. This is because future streams of dividends will continue to flow in with this lower price as the base. In principle, this will give you a higher yield per annum.
(3) Before you make a purchase or sell, do put in some effort to read up for any latest news. While the market usually balances itself, some news are structural in nature and may affect your investment decision.
(4) If you are risk-averse, the STI ETF is a good product to have, and there is really no harm in loading the bulk of your portfolio with it. The local banks are also generally stable over a long term. REITs are also good stocks to hold since they give steady dividends.
(5) It doesn’t matter that the price drops or rises immediately after you purchase – this is just a day-to-day fluctuation. Remember, you are here to hold them for long.
(6) Staring at charts and real time fluctuations for hours make you feel good and give a sense of satisfaction – but it hardly improves your performance. If you have standard working hours, you can always do the analysis in the evening and make a queue buy/sell when the market is opened. Alternatively, you can set some conditions on buy/sell price for the next day and fulfil the trade in the morning.
(7) If you have the opportunity, I do recommend that you take a glance at your watchlist once or twice during the day. It doesn’t require more than a minute. This will help you appreciate how the market moves with events happening in the real world and make your learning journey more fulfilling.
Additional Notes:
Market downtrend and volatility
The real challenge of investment comes not at this stage, when we are expecting the market to recover gradually. It is when you are already holding on a large amount of stocks in a period say December 2019 and the market began to crash. Your portfolio will suffer immense loss and it is highly unlikely that you have sufficient cash to keep the dollar averaging going forever. At some point, you just have to stop and hope that the market bounces back.
For experts and risk-loving individuals, they practise what is known as loss-cutting. This means that when STI has fallen from 3,000 to 2,900 and they sensed an imminent crash, they sell off the stocks even if the portfolio is suffering at a loss. Then when it reaches 2,500 like today, they start to buy back. Such methods are extremely high-risk as it depends on your ability to predict the market well. It is not recommended for non-full time investors.
Investing using CPF Account
If you are running short of cash and would like to open up more liquidity for investment, you can consider mobilising your CPF account. Note that the profit made from CPF investment returns to your CPF account. Nonetheless, you can use it to buy a house etc so it is still a worthwhile use of your money. You can only use 35% of your Ordinary Account in your CPF for stock investments. When you are investing using CPF account, do take extreme caution on the following:
(a) You will not be using your CPF to make large authorised purchase such as a house in the near term;
(b) Your returns in the stock market must be at least more than 2.5% in order to beat the interest rate in your CPF account. Do ensure proper accounting and book keeping is done and do not fool yourself on the actual returns.
Afterword:
This guide hopes to give beginners venturing into the stock market a good overview, and share some insights into investment. By having a measured methodology and being more well-informed on the risk and return of the dabbling in the stock market, I wish that the reader will be able to make substantial gains in his or her investment strategies. Other than making money, having a good understanding and foundation in investment also helps the individual to have a better appreciation of the financial world.
